

MusicInsights: Spotify ETL, Analytics, and AI

This project is a small end-to-end data pipeline and analysis tool built around a public Spotify dataset. I wanted a project that shows I can take raw data, clean it up, explore it, and publish it through an interactive dashboard. The goal is to demonstrate practical data analysis skills without making anything overly complex.

The project includes an ETL script that loads and cleans the raw Spotify tracks CSV, an exploratory data analysis notebook, and a dashboard built with Streamlit. The dashboard lets you browse the dataset, look at genre trends, view distributions of audio features, and explore songs through basic filtering. I also added a lightweight AI assistant that uses a short summary of the dataset to answer simple questions about the data.

Project Structure

The ETL pipeline lives in the etl folder.
It reads the raw dataset, cleans the necessary columns, removes duplicates, adds a few simple engineered features like duration in minutes and popularity buckets, and outputs a processed CSV.

The EDA notebook is in analysis/, where I looked at things like genre distribution, average popularity by genre, and correlations between audio features.

The dashboard code is inside the dashboard folder.
It includes pages for:

a general overview of the dataset,

average popularity by genre,

distributions of selected audio features,

and a simple song explorer with filtering.

The AI helper file provides a small wrapper around the OpenAI API. It doesn't send the entire dataset to the API; instead it uses a compact summary so each request stays lightweight. It also includes basic error handling so the dashboard doesn't break if the key is missing or out of quota.

Running the Project

To run everything locally, clone the repository and create a virtual environment:
python -m venv venv

Install dependencies:
pip install -r requirements.txt

run the pipeline
python -m etl.etl_pipeline

Add a .env for your API key for OpenAI
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_key_here

run the app
streamlit run dashboard/app.py


Notes on the AI Component

The AI assistant uses a small summary of the dataset instead of the full data, so it’s mainly for basic, high-level questions. This keeps requests cheap and avoids running into quota or rate-limit problems.

Possible Future Additions

Later on, I may add things like simple scatter plots, an artist summary page, or a basic popularity prediction model. I kept this version small so it stays clear and easy to maintain.

What This Project Demonstrates

This project shows that I can clean and prepare data, run basic EDA, and build a simple dashboard. It also includes a small AI feature with error handling to make the app more user-friendly.

